\section{Task Manager}

The task manager functionality is designed to parcel out tasks on a first come,
first serve basis to processes in a parallel application. Each processor can
request a task ID from the task manager and based on the value it receives, it
will execute a block of work corresponding to the ID. The task manager
guarantees that all IDs are sent out once and only once. The unique feature of
the task manager is that if the tasks take unequal amounts of time, then
processes with longer tasks will make fewer requests to the task manager than
processes that have relatively short tasks. This leads to an automatic dynamic
load balancing of the application that can substantially improve performance.
The task manager also supports multi-level parallelism and can be used in
conjunction with the sub-communicators described above to implement parallel
tasks within a parallel application. An example of the use of communicators and
task managers to create a code that uses multiple levels of parallelism can be
found in the contingency analysis application that is part of the GridPACK
distribution. This application is located in
\texttt{\textbf{src/applications/examples/contingency\_analysis}}.

Task managers use the \texttt{\textbf{gridpack::parallel}} namespace and can be created either on the world communicator or on a subcommunicator. Two constructors are available.

{
\color{red}
\begin{Verbatim}[fontseries=b]
TaskManager(void)

TaskManager(Communicator comm)
\end{Verbatim}
}

The first constructor must be called on all processors in the system and creates a task manager on the world communicator, the second is called on all processors within the communicator \texttt{\textbf{comm}}. Once the task manager has been created, the number of tasks must be set. This can be done with the function

{
\color{red}
\begin{Verbatim}[fontseries=b]
void set(int ntask)
\end{Verbatim}
}

where the variable \texttt{\textbf{ntask}} corresponds to the total number of
tasks to be performed. This call is collective on all processes in the
communicator and each process must use the same value of
\texttt{\textbf{ntask}}. The task IDs returned by the task manager will range
from 0 to \texttt{\textbf{ntask-1}}.

Once the task manager has been created, task IDs can be retrieved from the task manager using one of the functions

{
\color{red}
\begin{Verbatim}[fontseries=b]
bool nextTask(int *next)

bool nextTask(Communicator &comm, int *next)
\end{Verbatim}
}

The first function is called on a single processor and returns the task ID in
the variable \texttt{\textbf{next}}. The second is called on the communicator
\texttt{\textbf{comm}} by all processors in \texttt{\textbf{comm}} and returns
the same task ID on all processors (note that if all processors in
\texttt{\textbf{comm}} called the first \texttt{\textbf{nextTask}} function,
each processor in \texttt{\textbf{comm}} would end up with a different task ID).
The communicator argument in the second \texttt{\textbf{nextTask}} call should
be a subcommunicator relative to the communicator that was used to create the
task manager. Both functions return \texttt{\textbf{true}} if the task manager
has not run out of tasks, otherwise they return \texttt{\textbf{false}} and the value of \texttt{\textbf{next}} is set to -1.

The task manager also has a function

{
\color{red}
\begin{Verbatim}[fontseries=b]
void printStats(void)
\end{Verbatim}
}

that can be used to print out information to standard out about how many tasks
were assigned to each process. Thise function should be called collectively on
all processes.

A simple code fragment shows how communicators and task managers can be combined to create an application exhibiting multi-level parallelism.

{
\color{red}
\begin{Verbatim}[fontseries=b]
  gridpack::parallel::Communicator world
  int grp_size = 4;
  gridpack::parallel::Communicator task_comm = world.divide(grp_size);
  App app(task_comm);
  gridpack::parallel::TaskManager taskmgr;
  taskmgr.set(ntasks);
  int task_id;
  while(taskmgr.nextTask(task_comm, &task_id) {
    app.execute(task_data[task_id]);
  }
\end{Verbatim}
}

This code divides the world communicator into sub-communicators containing at
most 4 processes. An application is created on each task communicator and a task
manager is created on the world group. The task manager is set to execute
\texttt{\textbf{ntasks}} tasks and a while loop is created to execute each task.
Each call to \texttt{\textbf{nextTask}} returns the same value of
\texttt{\textbf{task\_id}} to the processors in \texttt{\textbf{task\_comm}}.
This ID is used to index into an array \texttt{\textbf{task\_data}} of data
structures that contain the input data necessary to execute the task. The size
of \texttt{\textbf{task\_data}} corresponds to the value of
\texttt{\textbf{ntasks}}. When the task manager runs out of tasks, the loop
terminates. Note that this structure does not guarantee that tasks are mapped to
processors in any fixed order. There is no guarantee that task 0 is executed on
process 0 or that some process will execute a given number of tasks. If one task
takes significantly longer than other tasks then it is likely that other
processors will pick up work from the processors executing the longer task. This
balances the workload if each process is involved in multiple tasks. Once the
workload drops to 1 task per process, this advantage is lost. There is also no
guarantee that if the calculation is repeated, that the same processes will end
up executing the same tasks. However, the final results should be the same.
